Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob and
to the MG by Doctor Mi Michael Petralia. He
is director of the Australian Research Center for Human
Evolution at Griffith University in Australia. His research has
centered on a range of subjects concerning human evolution,
including the evolution of cognition, the evolution of behavior,
year and the relations between climate change and dispersal.
And today we're going to talk about uh some
aspects of human evolution, the origins of Homo Sapiens,
human dispersal, the relationship between climate change and human
dispersal or as I referred to earlier and other
related topics. So, Doctor Petralia, welcome to the show.
It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you Ricardo. Thanks for having me.
So, before we get into Homo sapiens, our species,
could you tell us a little bit about what
we know prior to the speciation of Homo sapiens?
Sure. Yeah. Um There are fossils all over Africa
anywhere between 803 100,000 years ago and they're generally
characterized as Homo Hedl burns. Um And this is
a closely related ancestor to Homo Sapiens. In fact,
perhaps the precedent of Homo sapiens. Um BUT they're
morphologically different from us and thus the species name,
uh and they have very uh wide faces and
sloping foreheads and very thick and prominent brow ridges.
So if in fact very different from our own
skull shape, but they have pretty large brains. Uh
So their, their, their brains are about 1200 cubic
centimeters. And in Homo sapiens, we have brain size
of about 1400 cc. So they are a large
brained um um ancestor. They are also fairly tall.
They have very, very robust bodies. Uh And uh
but they are tall, uh they have very long
legs and you know, some of them are about
up to 100 80 centimeters in height. Um It's
like 6 ft tall. So, uh and, and they
are a species that um um well, you know,
that potentially led to us, but also a species
that also exited Africa. And so some of the
early exits of Homo Hydrogens may be 5 800,000
years ago. Um In terms of their culture, they
had some very advanced uh technology. So they used
um tool kits that are known as the Schulian.
And these are very large hand axes and cleaver
uh tool forms. Uh They're handheld uh stone tool
technologies and they will probably use butchery, you know,
against uh uh carcasses, for example. And we know
that Homo Hydrogens had some advanced technologies not only
in terms of stone tools but, you know, the
controlled use of fire. So, these fossils are found
all across Africa, uh, and, uh, you know, generally
well known species,
uh, but are, are we completely sure that we
speciated from Homo Heald Heidelberg or is that the
best hypothesis out there for the time being? Because,
uh, I mean, I've already talked with other, uh,
anthropologists, paleoanthropologists, biological anthropologists on the show. And at
least for now it seems to me if I'm
reading the literature correctly that there are a few
aspects of omid evolution that are a bit uh
messy. Right.
Yes. And Homo Hydrogens is one of those very
problematic species because uh you know, they're, some people
are very happy to call all these fossils. I've
described as Homo Hydrogens in Africa, but also in
Asia. And so it's very geographically widespread and there
is variation in morphology of uh those skeletal remains
and the, and the characteristics of the morphology. So
you get into debates obviously in terms of naming
species based on variations of morphology. But, you know,
generally speaking, uh you know, Homo hydro against us
is like a transitional spec species I believe. Um
And, and for the reasons I described like, you
know, the, these large brained creatures that seem to
be immediately transitional to us in Africa.
Mhm. So let's get into, I guess one of
the most contentious questions in the evolution of Homo
sapiens. So, did we appear in one single location
in Africa or multiple locations? I mean, what does
the evidence tell us? And I know there's lots
of discussions surrounding that topic. But, uh, what are
your thoughts on it?
Well, listen, traditionally, um, you know, a lot of
debates centered on exactly where Homo Sapiens arose in
Africa and there was always a back and forth
debates. Is it, it's South Africa, is it eastern
Africa? Where exactly is it? And, you know, a
lot of time and energy has been spent on
that in terms of the search, but also the
debates that emerged from that in terms of the
exact place of origin. But in recent years and
this is part research that I'm involved in. Um
BUT headed by Ellie Sherry, um you know, she
wrote a very prominent article a few years back
talking about there is no single origin point per
se and that looking for a single origin point
of our speciation is kind of futile to do
that because um you know, you have to imagine
a scenario where populations are distributed all across this
gigantic continent we call Africa. And sometimes they were,
you know, I I at certain times they were
in contact with each other, these populations. Uh AND
sometimes there was isolation. So, you know, you get
this sort of back and forth contact or isolation
between populations. And it's very possible there was almost
like a mosaic evolution that, you know, populations sometimes
contributed to other populations in terms of interbreeding and
such. So, looking for the exact point at which
we call fossils, homo sapiens, it is very difficult
to do and in fact, may be incorrect because
there could, you know, be a lot of uh
interbreeding and recombination between populations which eventually led to
um the species we know as Homo sapiens.
Mhm. Perhaps uh some of the confusion here has
to do with the way we tend to think
about the species as a concept, right? I mean,
because you mentioned there that it could have been
a sort of mosaic evolution and we have this
idea that there's one species that evolves into another
and uh it has to appear supposedly in one
single location because this idea that we have of
species, it wouldn't make much sense that the the
same species would appear in different locations. I mean,
how would that happen? Because how would it be
the same species and how would it be able
to uh I mean, elements or individuals from different
populations? Iw, how would they be able to interbreed
and all of that? Right. So I, I mean,
ii I might be wrong but perhaps it has
something to do with how we think about these
issues. Right.
Absolutely. No, I think you're spot on actually. Um
And I think that is the issue is that,
you know, to what degree was there mixing and
mating versus, you know, this sort of linear view
that we might have one species gives rise to
another species, which gives rise to yet another. I
mean, so I think, you know, evolution doesn't exactly
work in that way. Um And so what you
were describing, I think is quite accurate. And also
when you're looking at very rare fossils that have
morphological variability, you also have the problem of discriminating
precisely what you mean by a species. Number one.
And some of the morphological variability may have nothing
to do with biological change. But rather even, you
know, adaptive variability that you see in a skeleton,
um having to do with, you know, how you're
uh adapting to the terrain, for example. So, so
it's extremely difficult from an, you know, an evolutionary
standpoint over these periods of time to precisely discriminate
a species. And maybe that is a feudal effort
as well. And, you know, DNA has come to
bear on this subject and, you know, there's not
an exact agreement between DNA and morphology, but in
general, I think, you know, everyone's pretty comfortable with
the idea that our species, you know, uh is
around anywhere between 250 to 300,000 years ago in
Africa.
And then there's also the issue that sometimes we
find fossils that are even sometimes called sort of
transitional fossils where we're not completely sure if it's
still uh the previous I, I mean, it's II
I don't really like to use this sort of
language, but I'm going to talk this way for
the sake of simple, the previous species are already
almost sapiens because it has sort of, in terms
of its morphology, it has sort of traits that
are intermediate or something like that. And so, I
mean, again, the way we classify species, particularly in
this case, ominous species is also, uh I'm, I'm
in a domain of debate. Yeah,
absolutely. And I think the important thing is what
I was really just saying is that I think
it's really interesting to explore, you know, the variability
uh of these populations, really, I think we're looking
really at population variation and that's what's really interesting
and how the populations are changing and adapting and,
you know, potentially interbreeding. Um And so, and, and,
and like I said, I think there's generally a
consensus as to when our species arose, generally speaking.
So I, I think that, you know, getting into,
you know, real debates and sort of splitting hairs
on exactly when did Homo sapiens arise and exactly
where did they arise is kind of not what
we're really after from an evolutionary standpoint anyway?
Ok. But, uh I mean, if there's at least
the possibility that we've uh arose in several different
locations and across different populations, is there any evidence
that there were also populations of Homo sapiens that
might have evolved outside of Africa or did we
only appear initially even though across different populations within
Africa?
Yeah. Listen, I think that all the evidence right
now comfortably suggests that we arose in Africa. Um
And I, and that's the combination of evidence from,
you know, from the fossils from the DNA, from
the archaeological support that you may have in that.
So I think Africa really is the homeland of
Homo Sapiens. And I, you know, I would, you
know, almost strictly maintain that, however, there are suggestions
that Sapiens might have been sort of, uh, in
areas geographically very proximate to Africa, like in places
like Arabia where, you know, it's very close. Um,
AND it's possible some populations were there and they
contributed to what, you know, the gene pool of
what was going on in Africa. So, you know,
I think that, you know, but, but if you're
gonna start arguing that Homo Sapiens could have ari
arisen in far eastern Asia and things like that.
I don't think that's the case at all, you
know.
No, no, not at all. I mean, uh, I
hear I was asking you just to be sure
that it was at least as far as, you
know, we know that it was just in Africa.
And also because I heard a couple of times
as you said, there are people talking about the
Arabian peninsula and now and then about perhaps southern
Europe. But, uh, it's, it's African, at least as
far as we. Absolutely. And, and I think I'd
say there's suggestions that maybe a place like Arabia
could have um contributed, but these are almost suggestions
that have possibilities. So it's not factually based or
clear in the evidentiary record itself. Yeah.
By the way, uh in anthropology, what do you
mean? Uh OR what do anthropologists in general mean
when they mention modern humans? What is a modern
human? Exactly? I
mean, I, I actually personally steer away from terms
like anatomically modern humans or modern humans. I prefer
in all of my writings and even discussions to
go with species names. So as not to confuse
people because you know, when you use terms like
this, it means something different for different practitioners or
the public. Um And so I think that can
be quite confusing, even the term human can mean
something different for different people and even different scholars.
So my preference is always to try to use
the species name. So as to be super clear
on what we're talking about.
Mhm And what were the kinds of environments that
Homo sapiens specifically evolved in within Africa? Was it
savanna rainforest or some other kinds of environments?
Melissa, we have fossils of Homo sapiens all across
Africa from 300,000 years ago on up. And if
that's the case, you know, it's a large geographic
place and you know, from north to south east
to west. And if you just think about Africa
today, you have such a diverse array of environments
today. And that was the same in the past
and these environments were fluctuating through time over the
last 300,000 years. And yet we have archaeology and
fossils in all these geographic spaces. And so I
would say that, you know, Homo sapiens was in
a variety of ecosystems and just like you're saying,
grasslands, savannas, rainforests and so on. So I, I
see us as a species that, which was able
to adapt to a variety of situations. Um But
that said, um in the past, you know, uh
it, it's interesting in terms of the history of
our field, people didn't pay too much attention to
the specific environments in which say fossils or archaeology
was actually found, believe it or not. And so,
you know, environmental data was not actually even extracted
sometimes and people now do it in a standard
way in terms of our research. But we are
lacking a lot of information on the particular habitats
that Homo sapiens were actually adapting to. So, you
know, that's, that's a bit of a problem. But,
but nevertheless, I, I do think that there are
a wide array of ecosystems that sapiens was, was
in. Mhm. And that was different perhaps for other
species of, of hominins. And so that, you know,
our versatility, our flexibility, our, our, you know, our
array of adaptations that we have, you know, arose
really in early forms of Homo sapiens. And so,
you know, we're able to get in every ecosystem
of the world eventually, right. So, so that flexibility
really, you know, started, you know, early on in
our, in our own species uh evolution.
Mhm A and when it comes to the dispersal
of Homo sapiens, I mean, we like to talk
a lot about how to Africa migrations, but even
within Africa, there should be a rich history of
population movement, interaction between populations and also sometimes probably
replacement. Right.
Yeah. And you know, the actual on the ground
evidence for actually proving dispersal within Africa um or
population connections is, is is difficult because sometimes you
have, you know, you have arguments interpretations about the
data that you actually have. And so uh there
are arguments for dispersal within Africa, certainly in a
place like um you know, if you think about
the Sahara, you know, Sahara is of course a
very hyper arid uh environment today. But when you
look for the archaeology and the fossils, they're there
in those what are now hyper arid deserts. But
when, when, when people were there, it was, you
know, a green Sahara. So there, you know, there
were and grasslands and networks of rivers and lakes
and lakes, right? So populations would have been attracted
to those environments during ameliorated periods and moved north,
right? But when it got hyper arid again, you
know, through those fluctuations through time, populations would have
contracted or moved south. So you obviously are getting
movements even within Africa of populations as a product
of you know, changes of habitats and environments, right.
So we, we can see that, um and, you
know, we also know there are interactions between populations.
So for instance, like obsidian, a type of rock
that are, that's, that's found where artifacts were made
from sometimes are, you know, 3, 400 kilometers distance
from its sources, right? And so there are arguments
that hunter gatherers were already involved in trade and
exchange networks to, uh you know, exchange a a,
you know, a very special raw material like obsidian
uh down the line. And so we can see
that in, in, in the archaeological record and even
things like beads. There's arguments that populations in Eastern
Africa were connected to those in southern Africa in
terms of, you know, movement of styles of beads
and then those sort of bead forms change through
time where you perhaps you get more isolation of
populations and identity and traditions forming within, within regions.
Mhm. So before we get into out of Africa
migrations, I would like to ask you a couple
of questions about certain changes that probably occurred with
the advent of Homo Sapiens, we can discuss that
uh that probably played an important role in allowing
for those migrations to occur. So, were there technological
changes with Homo Sapiens? And if so how important
were they?
Well, there are very important technological changes with Homo
sapiens. So, you know, I described earlier like Homo
hydro Gansas was using these large hand axes and
cleavers. These are handheld forms for butchery. Uh BUT
they're handheld, right. And they're what we call a
Shian tool kits. But with Sapiens, uh you know,
the, the time period coincides with a transition from
these large hand axes and cleavers to what we
call middle stone age technology. And so you get
a tran transition to what are called these prepared
co cores and Lavalo technologies where you get cores
and flake tools, you get flake tools, they're small
little flakes that are used to perhaps for cutting
or scraping. But these, these, these, these uh flakes
could also be um pro made into points as
well. And these points could have been hefted onto
handles like spears. And so all of a sudden
you get the development of spear technology using a,
you know, a, a very sharp implement which is
tipping that spear in order to more efficiently hunt
animals. So you go from handheld technologies which Heidel
Briens was using to, you know, technologies like the
spear, for instance, that Sapiens seemed to be routinely
using early on.
Mhm And, and what is the evidence for symbolism
in, in early Homo Sapiens? And what sort of,
what can we deduce, let's say about our cognition
through symbolism?
Yes. So, so, you know, with Homo Sapiens, as
I was saying earlier, you get larger brain sizes,
right? So there's obviously selection for a larger and
larger brain which of course, the inference there is
that you get a more advanced cognitive species, a
more intelligent species, one that could plan ahead, for
example, and lo and behold, symbolism really starts to
increase after 300,000 years ago. So a site like
a logo in Kenya has produced evidence of what,
what are interpreted as symbolic forms of artifacts at
320,000 years ago. And so for instance, there are
black and and white rocks that are being used
that are imported for hundreds of kilometers away. And
there seems to be selection for colorful uh implements,
so colorful rocks in order to make implements, but
they're also engraved pieces of ochre, uh both red
and black ochre, which are thought to be used
for perhaps color coloring agents, perhaps even to adorn
the body. And so that these are thought to
be symbolic forms of artifacts 300,000 years ago. And
then, you know, as time marches on you continue
to get that, but certainly after 100,000 years ago,
you know, there's almost an explosion of things that
we would call symbolic, you know, ochre becomes very
common in the archaeological, right? And again that, you
know, a lot of populations are using that and
it may be that, you know, uh all these
populations are across Africa are behaving in a very
advanced way with respect to, you know, adorning their
bodies, calling out their, you know, regional traditions or
even individuality. Uh So these symbolic artifacts can be,
you know, used as um used to interpret that
kind of thing.
Uh But what does symbolism tell us about our,
about our cognition and perhaps also about our sociality?
I mean, how much information can we derive from
that basically?
Well, again, these are difficult things in terms of
interpretation and you really have to be grounded in
the evidence for it. And so sometimes it's not
easy and straightforward to interpret, but interpretations have been
made uh about some of these things. And you
know, it makes sense with respect to an increasing
brain size that you would get uh you know,
uh advanced planning and symbolism arising, you know, brain
sizes start to get as a, you know, as,
as advanced as our brain sizes today, right? So,
so it would make sense just generally speaking that,
you know, the these are very complex, uh you
know, individuals and societies and you also start to
get variation in technologies across Africa. So you start
to get regionalization of technologies of symbolic forms and
almost like the, you know, cultures are arising something
of course, very familiar to us today. You get
a lot of heterogeneity in artifact forms. And so,
you know, these are traditions that have a lot
of variation across Africa, just like it that we
see today before this time, you didn't see those
kinds of things happening. So it seems to that,
you know, you get traditions for forming social networks
forming identity forming, you know, all across Africa.
Mhm. And I would imagine that all of these
aspects, namely technological developments, cognitive evolution, uh evolution in
terms of our sociality, social networks, identities and so
on, all played an important role in the success
of our out of Africa migration. And uh we're
being able to migrate across such a wide array
of environments, right? Uh
I'd say the answer to that is yes and
no, because yes, in the sense that yes, I
do think that, you know, social networks are forming.
Um And, you know, social networks are in fact,
very important in terms of, you know, being able
to um you know, help each other within societies,
but also helping other groups that may be in
trouble, for example, from environmental stress or other pressures,
right? So social networks help you to enhance survivability.
And, you know, if you're thinking about, you know,
migrations, strong social networks obviously ha help in terms
of populations getting into risky environments, for example, right.
So your survivability chances increases. However, we know the
first dispersal's out of Africa. So, you know, they
were experiments in some ways, you know, populations were,
in fact, you know, very advanced, both technologically and
socially, but we also know that they were moving
out of Africa, but they were not moving, you
know, in permanent ways. And so there were a
lot of migrations out of Africa, but those populations
didn't necessarily carry on over long periods of time.
So, populations, you know, came, ee either sort of
retreated in a sense, going back to Africa only
to come out of Africa again and again and
again. So, even though the early social networks might
have been forming, they weren't necessarily strong enough yet
to allow populations just simply to migrate all across
the world.
Mhm. And, I mean, we know that, uh, of
course, evolutionarily speaking, it's not a long time at
all. But, uh, uh, since we got out of
Africa and we're going to get into that in
a second. But, uh, and spread across the Arabian
Peninsula, Southern Asia Europe and then even to the
Americas, it took perhaps tens of thousands of years.
Right. Right.
Yes, absolutely. Um, BUT, yeah, I mean, we can
talk about that relative to, uh, you know, what
we think about out, out of Africa, both in
the past and today because interpretations are in fact,
quite different, you know. Um,
OK, so le let's get into that then. So
when we talk about Homo Sapiens migrating out of
Africa, when exactly did it first occur? And I
mean, when we talk about out of Africa migrations,
I would imagine that perhaps it wasn't one single
migration but multiple migrations and the cross, perhaps different
periods of time or not.
Yes. Well, listen, our theories about this have changed
over the last 20 years, what I taught 20
years ago are far different than what I would
teach today. And so, you know, this is where,
you know, we've really improved the evidence for interpreting
out of Africa migrations. So when I used to
teach at Cambridge 20 years ago, we used to
argue, you know, argue that there was one single
migration out of Africa that was successful at 60,000
years ago. Today, I would say that there were
multiple migrations out of Africa that started 200,000 years
ago. And there were many out of Africa events
over time. And it just so happened that, you
know, in the last 60,000 years ago, perhaps the
most sort of biologically successful migration if you will
happen later on in time. But there were many
migrations out of Africa starting at least 200,000 years
ago. We didn't know that until recently. So, and
that's because of improvements in dating the fossil evidence,
the archaeological evidence has really come to bear in
recent years on this. So, so we have a
big re sculpting of how, how we think about
migration. So e even with respect to our own
species uh today.
Yeah, because uh I mean, uh I, I've heard
a lot about this sort of more simplistic history
of our out of Africa migrations where it supposedly
started happening. I don't know, 60,000, 75,000 years ago.
And then we went across Asia and Europe and
then as I said into the Americas and we
arrived at South America perhaps 15,000, 20 15,000 years
ago. And then, and then there's the chronology about
how we got into each place across Asia, for
example, and then into the Americas. But that's perhaps
too simplistic by now, right? It
is simplistic now, but it was the consensus view.
I mean, because there were many articles in nature
and science, one after the other to reinforce that
consensus view, I mean, there were many articles about
this both from DNA archaeology, fossil evidence to argue
for one single migration 60,000 years ago, utilizing coastlines.
And that was the consensus view of it was
a very strong hypothesis except that the evidence for
it was, you know, fairly weak. Um YOU know,
it was mostly coming out of DNA and DNA
using modern populations, contemporary populations. Once ancient DNA started
to come in to the forefront, the, you know,
the the genetics world changed in terms of interpretation
of that information. Um But also fossil, the fossil
evidence has improved dramatically over the last decade or
so. And so we can actually see fossils were
comfortable calling Homo sapiens in, you know, in, in
eastern Europe, in the Levant uh in Arabia that
clearly indicate earlier dispersal uh and they are not
coastal at all. So even though the coastal model
was the prevailing model that, you know, for instance,
it was not a shred of evidence for the
coastal models. So there used to be an argument,
you know, populations were coastal from South Africa. They
went all along the coast of Africa, all outside
of Africa, across Arabia, across India and eventually got
into Australia, utilizing the coasts and boats, except that
there was no evidence for it and there still
isn't, there's no good evidence for a coastal dispersal.
Um But what we did, for instance, in a,
in Arabia was we did surveys in terrestrial, inland
zones of Arabia and there is plenty of evidence
for dispersal inside Arabia. And, and it used to
be, they used, people used to think they were
avoiding Arabia because it was a hyper arid zone.
But people weren't really thinking of a green Arabia
where hunter gathers would be very happy in a
green Arabia living along rivers and lakes, right? So
they used to think, oh, they were side skirting
Arabia by us utilizing coasts 60,000 years ago. But
now we know Homo Sapiens was in Arabia by
90,000 years ago because we have fossils and we
have archaeology inside the middle of Arabia. So, so
the arguments for, you know, a rapid single migration
utilizing coast 60,000 years ago is out out of
the window. I would say,
uh there's perhaps uh uh I mean, I'm not
sure if, what I'm about to say is 100%
correct or not. And if not, please correct me,
but it seems to me that in terms of
Southern uh Asia. It's also been a little bit
uh neglected, at least to some extent in terms
of studying uh human evolution and, and these parcels,
I mean, I, I hope that uh next year
I will have Doctor Sheila Ere on the show
and because she's done a lot of work on
that, but I, it seems to me that at
least to some extent it's been a depth uh
area of the globe has been a little bit
uh neglected historically, at least I would
say absolutely true because um you know, we have
huge biases in human evolutionary studies. There are big
ge geographic biases in the way in which science
is done. And so you will find hundreds of
pro projects happening in Europe today, but you will
find only a few dozen were uh active in
Southern Asia, for example. Now, so you still get
huge biases in just the number of people dedicating
all their time and energy to certain geographic areas
in the world. You also get a huge difference
in the the amount of application of science done
as well. Not only the amount of work, but
you know, there are thousands of dates from Europe
on archaeological sites. There are only hundreds of dates
available in some other parts of the world like
Arabia and India. So you're dealing with gigantic disparities
in terms of the evidence out there. But it
doesn't mean that for instance, the archaeological record of
places like Arabia and India aren't rich because they
are, there are many hundreds, if not thousands of
paleolithic sites in these regions. It's just that the
hard work and the many decades of research have
not been done. So we do have geographic biases
in the way in which we tell stories about
out of Africa, even because of the amount of
evidence that we actually have. So I've been very
lucky over the years because I have had projects
in India and Sri Lanka, Arabia and doing those
projects has been very wonderful because they've been huge
opportunities. And every single time you go to the
field, major discoveries are made. That's because we, this
kind of research is almost pioneering because very few
projects are actually happening in terms of dedicated field
work. And so our fossil evidence isn't as great.
Our archaeological evidence in terms of publications isn't as
great compared to other parts of the world. So,
so yes, I mean, definitely there are biases in
the way in which we tell the story, but
I can tell you like we tested the coastal
model and that was very easy to test and
we found it, we falsified it almost right away
because we saw there were plenty of sites that
we could date to many periods of time which
we thought represented Homo sapiens in interior zones. And
so, ok, maybe coasts were used but not exclusively.
And so it's important to work in, in all
parts of the world and I would, you know,
I say that all the time that we really
need to give even coverage to different parts of
the world, the big chunks of Africa that are
really understudied, for example.
Mhm. And about the, the coastal model just to
talk a little bit more about it. You mentioned
that it was based mostly on ancient DNA and
also to some extent on the DNA
actually more like not ancient DNA
but, 000, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So sorry. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah, actually.
Right. Yeah. I mean, that's an important point because
there was no ancient DNA that there still is
hardly any ancient DNA. So you're using contemporary populations
in this geographic space in order to tell a
story about how rapidly populations may have been expanding
out of Africa. And there's an argument that they
expanded rapidly, therefore they were using boats, but there's
no evidence of boats nor coastal sites. Ok.
Yeah. But, uh, uh uh, no. Yeah, I, I
got it wrong. Sorry. So, um, it, so it
was DNA and then you mentioned also the fact
that people tend to tend to think that the
interior of, uh Arabia was arid as it is
mostly nowadays. But we now know that it wasn't,
but was there any other point to that sort
of rationale? Like, for example, did people think that
the movement was mostly coastal because coastal populations tend
to have access to particular resources or,
yeah, I mean, you could go to the coastal
hypothesis and people are still arguing for coastal, uh
uh you know, dispersal and the arguments are that
coasts are, you know, particular types of uh uh
habitats which could support populations in terms of, you
know, marine resources and near coastal resources in terms
of shellfish. And so there's an abundant supply of
that kind of, you know, um bio. Uh SO,
uh you know, there are arguments for this and
the coasts are easy sort of corridors to be
moving along and such. So, so there's arguments that,
you know, populations would have naturally followed coastlines out
of Africa, right, once they developed boating technology and
things like this. So, so there are arguments for
it. There is even n nutritional arguments that, you
know, the the kind of proteins found in, in
marine resources are good for brain development and such.
So, so there are arguments for all of this.
It's just that the on the ground evidence for
it is almost non existent in terms of coastal
adaptations or actual evidence to prove dispersal.
No, I I was just trying here to understand
the re the full rationale that people l for
that kind of argument
and people still are arguing for that. But I
would say that, you know, it was really popular
at one point. And you know, for me, you
know, what was really important is that surveys and
research happened in the interior zones, in places you
didn't expect sites, right. So, and they're there. So
therefore, now you have to explain that and, and
there's no way to talk about coastal dispersal when
you have such an abundance of archaeology, for example,
in interior zones. And, you know, hunter gatherers, as
we know, like living along rivers, they like living
a lot home lake. So, why not? I i
it's just natural to that habitats for them. And
that's where you find a lot of terrestrial biomass
plants and animals are abundant. And so, you know,
in these places, we used to think of as
stereotypically, you know, um bad places to be living.
That's not the way they always were in the
past because we have, you know, people aren't thinking
about the fluctuations of environments a across the Pleistocene
over the last 300,000 years, right. So, and that's
what's so important to really consider because those fluctuations
are maybe what drove dispersal and even drove our
own evolution.
Mhm. Yeah. A actually let me ask you a
little bit about climate change. Now, we've studied, for
example, the Arabian Peninsula. So uh by studying human
migration there, what can we learn about the effects
that climate change have on human dispersal?
I would say climate change has had a gigantic
effect. Uh And in somewhere like the Sahara and
Arabia, you have very strong environment, environmental variability because
rainfall is really changing the amount of rainfall that
you get really changes through time. So you get
these big fluctuations in the amount of rainfall because
of monsoon variability, for example, through time. And that's
really important because if you have very little rainfall,
as we know, you've got, you know, arid zones
and even hyper arid zones, which are almost impossible
to live in. Right. So if you go to
the empty quarter today, you know, you'll die pretty
rapidly because there's no water sources available to you
and there's no grasses, there's no animals that you
can be subsisting on. But when you had increased
rainfall and this happened multiple times in the past,
you get habitats that are forming that we are
familiar with, like in, in eastern Africa today where
you have that grasslands and savannahs and you get
a lot of biomass, right? So hunter gatherers love
those type of ecosystems. And Arabia, we have evidence
for that. We have um done remote sensing of
Arabia and our teams have actually demonstrated that there
are up to 10,000 ancient lakes of Arabia, 10,000
ancient lakes. And when we go to survey some
of those lake, we've only surveyed two or 300
of those lakes so far. And on 70% of
those lakes, we have fossils or archaeology and that
means people were coming in there repeatedly through time.
And so we date those archaeological sites and we
can see different ages of those sites, you know,
say 200,000 years ago, 100 25,000 years ago, 90
th 1000 years ago and so on. So we
know those lakes are coming and going and so
populations are expanding, contracting and possibly either moving on
or going extinct when those habitats get really bad.
Mhm. A and I guess that another thing that
we should consider here is, uh, I mean, thinking
again about the coastal hypothesis that is just focused
on the southern coast of Asia. Basically, it's not
that it's not all that we also dispersed within
the Arabian Peninsula, but also across wider areas in
Asia, right, like Central Asia and so on. And
that's also another thing that we have to consider
here.
Absolutely. And so you have your northern roots, right?
So you, you know, populations could be moving northwards
as well, which I think they were. Uh AND
we have evidence of that, of course. Um And
so Homo Sapiens is getting into northern latitudes as
well and those are all terrestrial movements, obviously. So,
so, you know, I uh so this this sort
of the mantra and the consensus that formed about
coastal hypotheses, you know, I think is, you know,
because of the power of DNA and the power
of getting into all those high impact journals. Um
And, you know, people's belief uh in terms of
the arguments why coastal roots are fa what people
believe are, are favorable habitats. Uh But I think
that ignores 99% of the evidence that we actually
have.
Mhm. And what other ominous species did we interact
with? Exactly. I mean, we know about neanderthals. Did
we also interact with the NUBS? For
example? Of course. So, you know, in some pop
Eurasian populations today, there's any anywhere between like 1
to 2% of Neanderthal DNA N today. So we
know there were obvious interactions with Homo sapiens as
they moved into habitats occupied by neanderthals. But as
they moved towards, you know, Eastern Asia, there certainly
would have been encountering the, the dinoso ins and
in some populations today, um uh denos ofin integrations
is as high as 4 to 6% uh within
some genomes. So, so, you know, there were, there's
probably a lot of interaction going on with denisovans
as we migrated into other habitats. It's also possible.
Uh YOU know, there are these uh species, sometimes
geneticists refer to them as ghost species. They're not
quite sure with other species we may have encountered
and interbred with. But you know, we know there
are other species around in Asia, like homo fluoresces,
homo lua lenses and others um that are in
Asia. But we don't know the degree to which
sapiens was actually interbreeding and interacting with those species.
But I wouldn't be surprised if, if there were
interactions with multiple forms uh of, of um ancestors
as we spread around the world. You know, because
also these, some of these populations these ancestral populations
perhaps were not, you know, some of maybe quite
large, but some could have been quite small that
they were in isolated pockets of a uh of
Asia. And once Homo sapiens, they, they may have
been interacting to a certain degree but not a
large degree, right. Um And so we get variations
in the degree to which populations might have been
interacting and interbreeding.
Mhm. Uh WHICH is also very, a very interesting
aspect of our revolution. I mean, the fact that
we interbred with Neanderthals, denisovans and possibly other species
because uh this also plays into some of what
we were talking about earlier when I for example,
mentioned the fact that uh it's complicated the way
we classify uh uh certain species because traditionally, and
I guess until recently, there was this very widespread
definition of species where uh uh individuals would be
part of the same species if they could uh
reproduce among themselves and produce offspring. That would be
uh for right? And I mean, in, in this
case, since we are interbreeding with the nubs and
neanderthals that are classified as other species, I mean,
again, we get into this complicated discussion that is
that is also a wider discussion in evolutionary biology
about what the species is.
Exactly. Yes. And a never ending debate, it seems
to
uh OK. So uh but when it comes to
the interactions we have, particularly with neanderthals, I mean,
that, that that's another very big discussion about what
led to the extinction of neanderthals. I mean, as
far as we know, did we have anything to
do with it? I mean, did we basically outcompete
them or?
I, I, again, these, you know, these are age
old debates, right? Uh, IN terms of what drove
the neanderthals to extinction. But, but I mean, I'm,
I'm more supportive of arguments which really get into
more demographic flux than anything rather than direct competition.
And I think, you know, neanderthals were around for
a long time and it seems that there's, you
know, some good evidence that, you know, their effective
population sizes were decreasing uh over time and, you
know, they were dealing with a lot of, you
know, environmental variability through time as well. And so
there, there seemed to be some isolation of some
of these populations and like many species, you know,
that many species obviously go extinct. And I don't,
I see that more as a sort of a
natural evolutionary um progression from the and tools than
saying, you know, these arguments of aggression or direct
contact and violence with, you know, Homo Sapiens driving
them as a replacement model. I, you know, the
evidence for, you know, uh for uh uh a
sort of aggressive replacement is really almost nil I
would say, in terms of sapiens and neanderthals, we've
a very, you know, limited evidence to argue for
that. So, II I almost, you know, there are
people like Clive Finlayson for a long time that
have been arguing for just demographic change in the
anatol populations and they, you know, ended up just
sort of dying out naturally because of environmental flux
and, and, and the way in which populations behave
over time.
Mhm. So about still about human disposals across the
globe. We've already talked here about how, so how
certain areas of the globe, like Southern Asia are
a bit understudied. But what would you say are
perhaps some of the big, just missing pieces in
the way in what we know and the way
we understand our Homo Sapiens spread across the globe
in Europe, Asia and then into Australia and the
Americas.
Yeah, there's so many questions. I mean, that's a,
that's a big question because you're talking about a
lot of geography, right? And so there's a lot
of uh you know, I mean, we could sit
here probably for an hour to talk about each
one of those places and the, you know, the,
the variation that we see in the archaeological record
even. And, but you know, listen, I mean, I'm
working on a couple projects right now like um
in different parts of the world. And I'm very
excited about some of the work we're doing uh
in collaboration with the Chinese. And you know, there
are some really interesting sites that are appearing in
China that are soon to be published, which talk
about early dispersal to really northern latitudes. And so
that's really interesting because we see, we, we think
we see very rapid dispersal of Homo sapiens anywhere
between 50,000 to 45,000 years ago from perhaps like
the Leon, you know, through to Russia, uh into
Mongolia and into China. And so this is part
of like this very unknown kind of uh rapid
movement of populations across vast territories. And we have
some sites in China which are consistent with that.
But it also complicating it because we have new
dates which you know, that very sort of simplistic
arrow that you might wanna draw from Laon, you
know, to the, you know, through Russia down into
Mongolia, to China doesn't necessarily work because uh you
know, again, we're dealing with populations and it may
be sort of mosaics going on, right, rather than
one line of advance. And so, you know, it's
very possible some populations are going north, some are
going a little bit more southernly in latitudes and
they're either interacting at times and some populations are
going eastward earlier than others. So, you know, there's
a lot, a lot to consider there in terms
of terrain, timing of movements, interactions of populations. And
so that's something that is really developing in terms
of our knowledge about these movements across Northern Asia.
Um But it's also probably consistent with a story
that has emerged out of Europe for decades in
terms of the meaning of the upper paleolithic the
movements into Europe like 45,000 years ago by Homo
Sapiens. And so we're really learning about these movements
in Northern Asia now. Uh And not a lot
of work has been dedicated to that. So, so
that's something that's very exciting. And I have to
say because III I, um um you know, I'm
a, I'm, I'm a director of a Human Evolution
Center here in Australia. Australia is an absolutely fascinating
place because, you know, the argument is that uh
indigenous people here uh represent the oldest culture of
Homo sapiens in the world, you know, in the
sense that people got here at least 60 65,000
years ago. And people survived over that period of
time. It wasn't like there was a big demographic
change, right? And what's so fascinating about Australia is
that once people got here, they survived over long
periods of time without complete turnover or extinction. So
people figured it out like they, they could actually
um you know, weather the storm in terms of,
you know, environmental variability. Uh AND they had really,
you know, the, the, their, their, their sort of
the innovations that Australian people, the Australian Aborigines had
were quite remarkable, uh the strong social networks that
they had. So, um you know, in other places
of the world, we see big turnovers of populations,
but not in Australia. Once people were here, they,
they were here continuously and they're still here. So,
you know, that's the sort of in a sense,
the longest running culture in the world, in terms
of when Homo Sapiens got to an unoccupied continent,
they were stable in a sense. Um And so,
you know, they, of course demographic changes and people
moving around a lot, but, you know, they're long
lasting. And that is fascinating to me because I'm
very interested in um you know, looking at contemporary
issues in terms of, you know, um sort of
ideas about like vulnerability and resilience to, you know,
ecosystem change, for example, like even what we're experiencing
in, in the world today. And I think, you
know, somewhere like Australia is really, there's so many
lessons to be had here in terms of how
people dealt with that vulnerability and how they were
resilient in the face of really, you know, gigantic
environmental changes through time and they persisted through it,
you know, so, so that really fascinates me in,
in terms of telling a story, even about things
that are of interest to us today,
that actually makes a very good segue to my
last question. So, uh you're uh an anthropologist, so
you study a lot, our human evolution, human past
do uh to what extent do you think lessons
from the past? Tell us anything about humanity today?
I mean, do you think that even as people
who live in modern industrialized and post industrial societies
can learn from some more traditional societies and even
societies from the past.
Yes, I, I absolutely think that we can learn
a lot from the past and, you know, we
are in a special moment. Like, listen, there are
8 billion of us in the world today. You
know, the situation that we find ourselves in today
is unique in a sense like it's never existed
on this planet ever before. Right? So, so there
are certain very special attributes about where we are
in the contemporary world and where we're headed. But,
you know, there is continuity in terms of what
we experienced in the past as well. And in
fact, I'm glad you asked that question because I'm
actually working on a very massive project. Uh Right
now, I'm building a consortium of interdisciplinary scholars within
Australia, but also internationally to study exactly that. How
do we bridge the past with the present? And
you know, there are many stories about resilience in
the past, vulnerability in the past. Um And those
stories and those lessons are definitely a bridge to,
to, to today, even though we find ourselves in
a certain situation, there are many situations in the
past that bear on uh the circumstances we have
today. So there are analogies, there are lessons learned.
And what I would like to do is bring
those lessons out more and actually learn how to
bridge past phenomena with present phenomena. Because, you know,
when you talk to an archaeologist, for example, they're
very uncomfortable sometimes bridging the past with the present,
right? Because you're out of your comfort zone in
terms of being able to do that. But if
you have dedicated research, which I intend to do
with this consortium on that bridging, then we can
put a lot of research into that. A lot
of energy into that. And normally we don't do
that. Like what we, what we do do is
we do a lot of discovery science looking at
the past but not really thinking about the relevance
of it to today and the bridging arguments that
you have to make to the contemporary world. So
I'm actually developing right now this consortium to do
precisely that it's a very difficult thing to do.
But I think, you know, we, we can do
it if we throw, you know, a lot of
interdisciplinary science at it and particular methods at looking
at past phenomena, present phenomenon.
Uh What what uh contemporary issues exactly are you
expecting to uh deal with? I mean, with that
kind of information, is it mostly climate change or
are there also other issues where that information would
apply to?
Well, very naturally, like almost the easiest thing to
do is actually look at climatic variability and how
do populations react in the past, how we're reacting
today? And that may give us some ideas about
mitigating the circumstances that we find ourselves in, right,
in terms of lessons, tho those are the most
obvious ways to be looking at that. But also
I think there were a lot of social, social
issues too that we're in crisis, crisis mode and
in a lot of ways today, but the crises
that we're facing today are not unique to societies,
societies in the past dealt with a lot with
a lot of different crises as well, both socially
and environmentally. And so I think again, we can,
you know, you, you, you brought up the word
anthropology, I think, you know, if we're sort of
anthropologists in the, in the contemporary scene in the
past, then, you know, we can, we can talk
about that bridging and, and how that works. So
I would say it's a little bit of everything,
the, the environments are, are the most obvious. But
I, I also think, you know, that people have
dealt with societal collapse, societal changes in the past.
Uh um And, and, you know, if we can
bring that out more, I, I think, you know,
other scholars will learn a lot more about what,
you know, what happened in human history and even
in the deep time because people actually don't realize
it as much. Uh And, and then the, the
key is like how to develop methods in order
to, you know, connect the past and the present.
Mhm. Well, that sounds really fascinating. And uh just
before we go, would you like to tell people
where they can follow your work on the internet?
Well, yes. Um So, um you know, our Center,
uh the Australian Research Center for Human Evolution has
a dedicated website to uh my own research, but
also the group that I'm part of and you
know, we're part of also an international what network
of scholars. So if you go to that website,
you can look up projects, you can look up
publications, you can look up research themes that I've
talked about uh today and you know, you can
go from there and, and, and click away.
Ok, great. So I will be leaving some links
to your work and to the center in the
description box of the interview and Doctor Praia. Thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a fascinating talk.
Thank you so much for
pleasure and thank you for having me, Ricardo. That's
great. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Kel Matthew Whitting
B are no wt ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H
her meal and Lain Jung y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi Nale Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fre Franka La Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old
Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin.
Gilbert Jessica. No week, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander, Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers, these our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.